[docs] Big model loading (#29920)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/big_models.md

-->

# Instantiate a big model

A barrier to accessing very large pretrained models is the amount of memory the require. When you load a pretrained PyTorch model, you usually:

1. Create a model with random weights.
2. Load your pretrained weights.
3. Put those pretrained weights in your random model.

> The first two steps both require a full version of the model in memory and if your model starts weighing several GBs, you may not have enough memory for two copies of the model. This problem is amplified in distributed training environments because each process loads the pretrained model and stores two copies in memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first two steps both require a full version of the model in memory and if your model weights several GBs, you may not have enough memory for two copies of the model. This problem is amplified in distributed training environments because each process loads the pretrained model and stores two copies in memory.
```

<Tip>

> The randomly created model is initialized with "empty" tensors, which take space in memory without filling it. The random values are whatever was in this chunk of memory at the time. To improve loading speed, the random initialization of the weights from the appropriate distribution (such as a normal distribution for instance) is performed *after* the pretrained weights have been loaded in the model.

Reviewer: To link with the fast init! It's actually default transformers that call `_init_weights`. Torch's `torch.load` does not use any random initialization!

...     model.save_pretrained(tmp_dir, max_shard_size="5GB")
...     load_sharded_checkpoint(model, tmp_dir)
```

### Shard metadata

The index file determines which keys are in the checkpoint and where the corresponding weights are stored. The index is loaded like any other json file and you can get a dictionary from it.

```py
>>> import json

>>> with tempfile.TemporaryDirectory() as tmp_dir:
...     model.save_pretrained(tmp_dir, max_shard_size="5GB")
...     with open(os.path.join(tmp_dir, "model.safetensors.index.json"), "r") as f:
...         index = json.load(f)

>>> print(index.keys())
dict_keys(['metadata', 'weight_map'])
```

The `metadata` provides the total model size.

```py
>>> index["metadata"]
{'total_size': 28966928384}
```

The `weight_map` maps each parameter name (typically `state_dict` in a PyTorch model) to the shard it's stored in.

```py
>>> index["weight_map"]
{'lm_head.weight': 'model-00006-of-00006.safetensors',
 'model.embed_tokens.weight': 'model-00001-of-00006.safetensors',
 'model.layers.0.input_layernorm.weight': 'model-00001-of-00006.safetensors',
 'model.layers.0.mlp.down_proj.weight': 'model-00001-of-00006.safetensors',
 ...
}

> ```

Reviewer: By default in transformers we have the `fast_init` path that skips the random initialization for all weights that are correctly loaded
